.TH CALAMUS 1 "2026-07-12" "Calamus 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
calamus \- GTK4 Markdown editor for GNOME
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B calamus
[\fIOPTION\fR]...
[\fIFILE\fR]...
.br
\fIcommand\fR | \fBcalamus\fR [\fB\-\-pipe\-base\-path\fR \fIPATH\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Calamus
is a GTK4 Markdown editor for GNOME with tabbed editing, a live preview pane,
a directory-tree sidebar, and export to HTML, PDF, and ODT.
.PP
One or more \fIFILE\fR arguments (Markdown files) may be supplied on the
command line; each is opened in its own tab.
Calamus also accepts Markdown content on standard input when stdin is not a
terminal (pipe mode).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-preview\fR
Open in read-only preview mode.
The editor toolbar and editing controls are hidden; the document is displayed
as a rendered HTML preview only.
.TP
\fB\-\-pipe\-base\-path\fR=\fIPATH\fR
Set the base path used to resolve relative links (images, includes) when
content is read from standard input.
\fIPATH\fR may be a directory or a file; relative paths are resolved against
the current working directory.
This option has no effect when files are opened directly from the command line.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Show a summary of application options and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\-all\fR
Show all help options, including GTK and GApplication options, and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\-gapplication\fR
Show GApplication-specific options (e.g.\& \fB\-\-gapplication\-service\fR)
and exit.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
\fIFILE\fR
Path to a Markdown file to open.
Multiple files may be specified; each is opened in a separate editor tab.
If a given path does not exist, Calamus prints an error to stderr and exits
with status 1.
.SH STDIN
When stdin is not a terminal (i.e.\& a pipe or a redirect), Calamus reads the
content and opens it in a new tab.
Use \fB\-\-pipe\-base\-path\fR to control relative-link resolution in this
mode.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Successful completion.
.TP
.B 1
A command-line argument was invalid (e.g.\& a file was not found or
\fB\-\-pipe\-base\-path\fR pointed to a nonexistent location).
.SH EXAMPLES
Open a single file:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
calamus README.md
.EE
.RE
.PP
Open multiple files in separate tabs:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
calamus notes.md TODO.md
.EE
.RE
.PP
Open a file in preview-only mode:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
calamus \-\-preview notes.md
.EE
.RE
.PP
Pipe content into Calamus, resolving relative links relative to the project
root:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
cat docs/guide.md | calamus \-\-pipe\-base\-path /home/user/project
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/Calamus/Calamus.conf
User preferences (theme, font, and other settings managed through the
in-app Preferences dialog).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR xdg-open (1),
.BR gtk4-demo (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at <https://github.com/mray271/calamus/issues>.
.SH AUTHORS
Calamus contributors.
See the project repository for a full list.
.SH LICENSE
GNU General Public License version\~3 or later.
See <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html>.
